---
title: "Free-to-use software or commercial software, why care?"
date: 2016-10-24 11:00:00
categories: [foss]
tags: [linux]
---

Do you have a computer or phone? Do you run a softwares on it? Hopefully you do,
but have you ever wondered how the software you use actually came to be made?
Well, it is people who develop those softwares and are called **_Softwares
Developers_**.

Anyway, developing a software is not something that they sit down for some two
hours or a day and then it is finished. Software developers have to sit down and
crack their head through hundreds to million lines of computer code to get the
job done. But it is not just the lines of code it takes to build the software,
but how long it takes to build one. It can take the developers months to years,
depending on how large the projects is. The number of developers who develop
softwares can range from one man to thousands, depending on the size of the
projects and how many years the developer(s) is/are willing to spend on a single
software. Softwares like computer Operating Systems (Windows, Android, iOS,
elementary OS) take years to get close to a state where it is usable, even
though thousands of developers have worked on it. The obvious thing is, no one
will likely work on a software for months to years, full time or par-time
without getting paid. Fortunately, some people do but that is a subject to be
discussed later.

Usually, the developers will have to be paid by whoever is going to take
ownership of the software. Let's say you spend about 1.5 million US Dollars to
develop a software. Will you give it for free or you will sell and get profit?

Well as it appears not everyone give such an investment for free. Therefore,
they license their softwares such that you will have to pay to use. Such
softwares are commonly referred to as **_Commercial Softwares_** and are mostly
proprietary (closed source). This implies any one or group people who will want
to who use that softwares must pay (or whatever they owner says) otherwise ....
hmm! Users must therefore purchase a license or product key or a dongle (a
product key in the form of a USB drive) to use such softwares.

But there are other groups of software which you are _not required_ to pay
before using. It does not mean they are low quality, just that the owner or
funders or developers decided to give it for free. Those may be either open
source, libre (free) software, etc. — new terms are coined everyday.

Now, have you bothered to know whether the software **_you_** use: operating
system, office suite, music player, phone apps, internet browser, game, etc. is
free to use? If it is not and you have not paid, then .... hmm ... you may be
breaking the law. You may think that the owners do not know, but do you possibly
believe they made that software without considering the possibility that someone
might try to abuse their rights?

> ### "What is the potential problem in using a software illegally?"

By using a software illegally, you are breaking the law which involves several
penalties — from imprisonment to a huge fine. You really do not want to find
yourself in such a situation. This is why you need to check whether you are
using a free-to-use software or commercial.
